# Case-SVM-Spot-the-Star-
Pulsar_Stars-Project

Pulsars are a rare type of Neutron star that produce radio emission detectable here on Earth. They are of considerable scientific interest as probes of space-time, the inter-stellar medium, and states of matter .As pulsars rotate, their emission beam sweeps across the sky, and when this crosses our line of sight, produces a detectable pattern of broadband radio emission. As pulsars rotate rapidly, this pattern repeats periodically. Thus pulsar search involves looking for periodic radio signals with large radio telescopes. Each pulsar produces a slightly different emission pattern, which varies slightly with each rotation. Thus a potential signal detection known as a 'candidate', is averaged over many rotations of the pulsar, as determined by the length of an observation. In the absence of additional info, each candidate could potentially describe a real pulsar. However in practice almost all detections are caused by radio frequency interference (RFI) and noise, making legitimate signals hard to find. Machine learning tools are now being used to automatically label pulsar candidates to facilitate rapid analysis. Classification systems in particular are being widely adopted, which treat the candidate data sets as binary classification problems. Here the legitimate pulsar examples are a minority positive class, and spurious examples the majority negative class.
In this project, I have implemented traditional Machine Learning Classifiers (Logistic Regression, Decision Trees, Support Vector Machines and Random Forest) as well as Deep Learning models (Artificial Neural Network and Convolutional Neural Network) to classify Pulsar Stars. Pulsars are a rare type of Neutron star that produce radio emission detectable here on Earth. They are of considerable scientific interest as probes of space-time, the inter-stellar medium, and states of matter.

The legitimate pulsar examples are a minority positive class with only 1639 real pulsar examples out of 17898 examples. The goal of this project is to evaluate the performance of the models mentioned above to see which model does the best job in classifying the real pulsars. The traditional ML classifiers performed significantly better in classifying the real pulsars. Among the traditional ML classifiers, Random Forest had the best performance.
